Initial Draft of Proposed Voting Policy (#2)
IntersectMBO/OSC-documentation: open-source-committee/VOTING.md

# Committee Election Policies

> > **Status:** Draft <br />

Author: This was just to make sure it was very explicit that it was a "draft" and not to be formally excepted :) Figured it would be removed for final publication

> **Proposed On:** 2024-01-26 <br />
> **Proposed By:** Adam Dean <br />
> **Revision:** 1.0.0

## Introduction:

The purpose of this proposal is to establish a structured voting and reelection cycle for the 9-member committee of
the Intersect Open-Source Committee (OSC). This proposed system aims to ensure a balance between continuity and renewal
within the committee, thus enhancing the overall effectiveness and stability of our organization.

## Implementation Method:

The following method and criteria are proposed for the (re)election of OSC members following a fairly common staggered
board method:

1. **Term:** All members of the OSC shall be elected for a period of service of one year. No member of the committee,
   with the exception of bootstrapping members during the bootstrapping phase, may serve for a period of longer than
   one year without standing for re-election.
2. **Term Limits:** Given that members of the OSC should be elected to their position meritocrously based upon their
   contributions, there are no capped term limits currently imposed.
3. **Cohorts:** The membership of the committee should be broken up into three cohorts that face election cycles

>    staggered throughout the year (one election every 4 months). This provides numerous benefits as detailed in the

Author: My thought is open candidacy 2-weeks before voting for people to self-nominate, assuming there are no by-laws prohibiting their candidacy, a pool of eligible candidates are then put forward 1-week before voting in some sort of a "Town Hall" type platform (and/or forum or other public communications channels). Vote happens, and we start the process of smoothly moving the un-elected out of the committee and onboarding the new members, in this way, we should have no more than 1-month or so at max worth of "campaigning"

>    staggered throughout the year (one election every 4 months). This provides numerous benefits as detailed in the

Reviewer: That's still 3 months a year, so 1/4 of all time will be in campaign season. Not to be taken lightly!

   should be enough to allow eligible candidates time to attend *at least* one meeting of the committee to introduce
   themselves (if necessary) to the other members of the committee prior to voting. The *candidate forum meeting* may
   be a special (outside of regular schedule) meeting of the committee in order to not detract from regular committee
   business.
   
### Election Cycle
| Period | Purpose                                                                  |
|--------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| n-2(?) | Candidacy nomination period opens                                        |
| n-1    | Special meeting of the committee for candidate introductions & questions |
| n      | Vote Held                                                                |
| n+1    | Retiring members hand off/complete outstanding tasks                     |
| n+2    | Newly appointed members onboarded to the committee                       |

5. **Election Method & Results:** The election method should follow *at least* the standard voting method adopted by

>    the committee. Votes **must** use roll-call voting and results **must** be published via the committee's public

Author: This was unclear from the charter. I'm happy to revise if we get more clarity on who, when, where, and how this committee will be elected. Most of the documentation in the charter seemed to suggest instead (based on PWCs) that it was more of an internal process.

>    the committee. Votes **must** use roll-call voting and results **must** be published via the committee's public

Reviewer: I think the charter doesn't specify this at all (because we are the first people to be thinking about it properly, I think). But I do think it's supposed to be the case that the franchise for these Intersect committees is the set of Intersect members.

>    the committee. Votes **must** use roll-call voting and results **must** be published via the committee's public

Author: The document has been updated to reflect that members of Intersect shall be the voting base and that the voting procedure should follow Intersect-adopted methods

   communications channel(s).
    1. **Ties & Run-Offs:** The method of resolving a tie or run-off scenario is currently TBD.
    2. **Quorum:** A vote for candidates should only be considered valid if *at least* a simple majority of the duly
       elected (non-appointed or interim) members of the committee have participated in voting.

>     3. **Conflict of Interest:** No current member of the committee who is standing for reelection (incumbent) may

Author: Fair point worthy of greater discussion by the community at large I believe. With such a small and tight-knit community the definition of a commercial or financial relationship between candidates and/or voters (if it is to be written) should be pretty clear. Hyperbolic (Fake) Example: I accepted $100 for consulting at one time a year ago from Project X, the CEO of Project X is now applying to be on the OSS Steering Committee, am I honor-bound to recuse myself for conflict of interest?

>     3. **Conflict of Interest:** No current member of the committee who is standing for reelection (incumbent) may

Reviewer: Yeah, we can probably leave this for now. One possibility is an aggressive policy for _declaring_ conflicts of interest, and then leaving it to the committee's discretion about whether a CoI is important enough to ask you to abstain.

>     3. **Conflict of Interest:** No current member of the committee who is standing for reelection (incumbent) may

Author: This language has been removed as it is a non-issue given that the public membership of Intersect will now be the electorate base which removes most of the issues w.r.t. conflict of interest.

       participate in voting.
    4. **Lack of Candidates:** Should a situation arise where there is a lack of eligible candidates standing in any
       given cohort election cycle (i.e. only 1 seat of 3 vacancies filled), the vacant seats may be appointed purusant
       to the same terms of *abdication and vacancies*.

6. **Abdication & Vacancies:** Should a seat on the committee become vacated due to member resignation or abdication
   the empty seat may be appointed to an *interim term* via either special election or appointment by the sitting

>    committee Chair person. An *interim term* shall begin from the date of appointment and continue until the next

Author: I think I forgot to include it in the draft spec but potentially the order of operations for filling a vacancy could be:
* Runner(s) up from a previous election cycle
* A X-day period of community self-nomination for appointment
* Last ditch, committee themselves appoints

>    committee Chair person. An *interim term* shall begin from the date of appointment and continue until the next

Reviewer: I think this should be extra lightweight, since presumably the idea is that this is damaging the committee's ability to function. I think something like:
- An email asking for nominations within a week
- A committee vote on the candidates
could be fine

  and new ideas into the committee regularly. This continuous infusion of new blood can prevent stagnation, encourage
  innovation, and help the organization adapt to changing circumstances and member needs.

* **Reduced Learning Curve:** New committee members have the opportunity to learn from their experienced counterparts,
  gradually easing into their roles. This reduces the learning curve and allows new members to become productive
  contributors more quickly. In a traditional annual election model, a complete overhaul of the committee can
  lead to disruptions and loss of institutional knowledge. By electing members in smaller batches over a period of
  time, we minimize the risk of abrupt transitions that can hinder the organization's progress.

* **Member Engagement:** Frequent elections and opportunities for members to participate in the voting process can
  enhance overall member engagement. Members are more likely to stay actively involved when they know their voices
  are heard regularly, leading to a more vibrant and participatory organization, which ultimately strengthens the

>   organization's sense of community and shared purpose.

Author: To be fair, I was actually under the impression that it would be the existing committee members doing the voting as part of their regular duties as members of the committee and not thinking about the community at-large. However, a "fear" of voter burnout does not outweigh the benefit of a staggered committee so that we can avoid large periods of downtime and inefficiency if a large portion of the committee is replaced en masse given only a year election cycle.

>   organization's sense of community and shared purpose.

Reviewer: Sure - we can just note it as a danger, and we can always adjust course later.

# Committee Election Policies

## Introduction:

> The purpose of this policy is to establish a structured voting and reelection

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This policy establishes a structured voting and reelection
```

Assuming the policy is approved, the indirection here seems unnecessary

  one) appointed member from the Intersect Open Source Office (OSO). Members are
  expected to attend regular meetings of the committee and working groups, are
  expected to vote on and participate in the governance of the committee and
  relevant working groups, and have the _right_ to be heard during any meeting
  of the OSC.
* **OSO Representative:** One employee of Intersect who works for or as part of
  the Open Source Office (OSO) shall be appointed to serve as a regular, voting
  member of the committee. This Representative shall otherwise have no extra
  powers or privileges within the committee and _should not_ serve as the chair
  or co-chair of the committee except for in the case of absence, abdication,
  and vacancy until such time as a suitable replacement may be made from the
  elected membership.
* **Secretary:** The Secretary of the committee shall be a non-voting appointee
  from Intersect. Responsible for coordinating, distributing, and sharing the
  agenda, notes, and meeting information throughout the committee members as
  well as the greater Intersect membership.
* **Chair:** Must be elected internally (by the committee) from the 9 elected

>   members of the committee. Expected to lead meetings of the OSC and help set

Reviewer 2: So far I feel like the reality is that the secretary is leading the meeting?

  open source projects or experience be related to Cardano or Cardano Core
  repositories.

### Election Cycle

> All phases of the election cycle: Nomination, Voting, and Transition should be
> _at least_ two weeks to ensure maximum participation from interested parties.

| Period | Purpose                                                                  |
|--------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| n-2    | Candidacy nomination period opens                                        |
| n-1    | Special meeting of the committee for candidate introductions & questions |
| n      | Vote Held                                                                |
| n+1    | Retiring members hand off/complete outstanding tasks                     |
| n+2    | Newly appointed members onboarded to the committee                       |

5. **Election Method & Results:** The election shall be open to all Members of
   Intersect and shall follow the standards and rules specified by Intersect to
   follow the format and structure of other votes. Votes **must** use roll-call
   voting and results **must** be published via the committee's public

>    communications channel(s).

Reviewer 2: Who is responsible for counting/certifying the votes?

Reviewer 2: Is the roll-call in a meeting/other channel?

Author: This was a legacy bit from the original draft where I was under the impression the committee itself was voting on new members. It will be removed.

    - **Ties & Run-Offs:** The method of resolving a tie or run-off scenario is

>       currently TBD.

Reviewer 2: What is the actual approval measure? Yays - Nays? Overally number of yays? Normally roll-call is for individual, nominally independent decisions.

Author: This was a bit of legacy from the original draft which had the current committee serving as the electorate base. This has been modified.

        - Appointment by the acting Chair

> More points of order will likely need to be added here based upon feedback
> from the OSC community.

## Rationale:

The staggered board method proposed here provides a number of critical benefits
that should allow the committee to continuously operate effectively including:

* **Continuity and Stability:** By electing only one cohort of committee members
  every six months, the committee maintains a significant level of continuity
  and stability. This ensures that a majority of the committee is composed of
  experienced members who are familiar with the committee's operations, goals,
  and history. As a result, the committee can maintain a consistent strategic
  direction and avoid abrupt disruptions.

* **Preservation of Institutional Knowledge:** With staggered terms and limited
  turnover, institutional knowledge is preserved within the committee.
  Experienced members can pass on valuable information, lessons learned, and
  best practices to newer members, ensuring a smoother transition and a more
  effective committee.

* **Avoiding Stagnation:** Continuity should not be mistaken for stagnation. The

>   four-month voting periods provide an opportunity for the organization to

Reviewer 3: `four-month` -> `six-month`

  and collective performance. This accountability helps maintain the committee's
  effectiveness and ensures that under-performing members can be addressed and
  replaced in a timely manner.

* **Consistent Leadership Transition:** The method provides a predictable and
  structured way for leadership transitions to occur. This reduces the potential
  for leadership vacuums and ensures that the organization always has a mix of
  experienced and newer leaders ready to take on responsibilities.

* **Flexibility:** In the event of unforeseen circumstances or challenges, the
  staggered board method allows the organization to adapt more readily. If
  specific committee members need to be replaced or if new leadership is
  required, the method provides a systematic way to do so without disrupting the
  entire committee.

In summary, the staggered board method combines the benefits of continuity and
stability with the advantages of regular infusion of fresh perspectives and
engagement. It is a well-balanced approach to committee governance that can
contribute to the long-term success and resilience of a members-based
organization.

> ## Conclusion:

Reviewer 2: I think this section is unnecessary

Author: Removed.
